>> Hi, it's James here
from "Food Matters,"
and welcome to this interview
with Douglas Rushkoff.
Douglas is a media theorist.
He has a PhD, and he is
an author and founder
of the term, the
book, and the podcast
"Team Human," which
is about helping us
live in a more authentic life
in a time of great paradox
when we're more disconnected
than ever before
and more connected
than ever before.
He does this through
helping us understand
our colonialist past,
the Victorian era
and industrial
age and how that's
fed into the digital
revolution, and what
we can do to stave off
the anxiety and the lack
of self-worth that comes
with the modern era.
Douglas, how are you?
>> Hi, good to be with you.
>> Yeah, it's great.
I want to start early on.
And I think your
interpretation of this period
is really interesting.
As we colonized
the new world, we
were happily going
amongst our business,
but we were observed
in a very different way
by the indigenous people.
What was happening at that time?
>> Well, it's interesting.
I mean, most of us
know the conquistadors
and other colonizers
were not nice, right?
We were going, enslaving people,
and clear-cutting forests,
and really just destroying
nature, destroying people.
We were killing machines.
And I would have thought
that those people would
have just thought that
we're evil, you know?
Oh, white people are evil.
But they were such humanists.
They were such lovers
of humans and life
that they saw us as victims.
They thought that white people
had a disease that they called
"wetiko," and they
thought it was
a disease of the spirit that
led us to just destroy things
unnecessarily, this kind
of dominator mentality,
this domination of nature.
And I always appreciated that.
I mean, I'm trying to
hold onto that sensibility
that, no, people are
not intrinsically evil,
that we're in a system,
we're living on a game,
on a landscape that is
not natural, you know?
It's like setting up reality
as a game of musical chairs,
where there's not enough
chairs for everybody.
And then we think, oh,
well that's the world,
so we're all competing over
the chairs that there are.
But it's like, no, we could
just put two more chairs there,
you know?
And that's sort of
how I understand
central currency, and
corporatism, and capitalism,
that we had had
in the late Middle
Ages, the beginnings of
a peer-to-peer economy,
and we were using
market moneys that
expired by the end of the day.
And people were getting wealthy.
And the lords, the
aristocracy saw
that as the peasants
became the middle class,
the aristocracy got
relatively poorer.
So they made local
moneys illegal.
They made small
business illegal.
Now, you had to borrow money
from a central treasury
and interest, which meant
the economy had to grow.
You couldn't work for yourself.
You had to work for a chartered
monopoly or corporation,
sell your time
instead of your value.
So we ended up with this kind
of dehumanized view of people,
and this economy that
just by its very nature,
an economy that had to grow
in order to keep working.
So we started taking stuff,
just going to Africa,
and going to South America,
and just expanding by any means
necessary.
Really, as I see
it, that's the heart
of wetiko, of what
this disease is.
It's mistaking an operating
system, really, for reality.
And once you do that,
it's really hard
to see your way out of it.
>> How do you think that
the indigenous people,
especially the Indian Americans
I think you're talking about,
had such a positive
viewpoint on it all?
I mean, if anybody saw
that happening, they'd
be like, what crazy
people, and yet that
was so compassionate to think
that, oh, they're just unwell.
They'll get better one day.
>> Well, I don't know
if they thought--
I mean, they might have
thought it was a fatal disease.
I think it's because they look
into the eyes of another human
being, and they're able to see
that other person as a person,
you know?
And I think that's weird for us.
We tend-- "we" meaning, I
guess, white, Western Europeans,
and that whole
civilization, we tend
to see people who are
different from us as other.
We don't accept their
humanity as a given.
We see them first as an object,
then maybe as an animal,
and then, if they
really are close
enough to us and our
values, then, OK,
that's another person.
And I think that the indigenous
people had a heightened ability
to establish rapport.
That hadn't been
civilized out of them yet.
You know, making eye contact,
being part of an oral culture,
rather than a literate
culture or a television
culture means that you engage
with people by making eye
contact, syncing
up your breathing,
seeing if their pupils are
getting larger or smaller
as you talk to them, seeing
if your head is making
micro motions of agreement.
Then, the oxytocin gets
released in my bloodstream,
my mirror neurons
start flashing,
and it's a way of moving through
the world, of always optimized
for connection and rapport--
who is this?
How do we connect?
And if they do that,
even if they're
looking at a white Western
conquistadors who's
been told to take his sword
and start killing people,
they look in the
eyes and they see,
oh, there's this
human being there
that's being told to
go kill or to take,
but wow, they're in pain.
They're suffering.
And how do I reach that person?
>> It's beautiful.
I mean, I've certainly
experienced that.
When you go into
indigenous cultures,
they're much more connected.
They greet you regardless
of who you are,
or your title, or your worth.
They're like, wow,
hello, person.
Nice to see you.
>> I mean, I'm no
awakened being.
I'm really not.
But I remember I got
mugged like 10 years ago.
And I looked into the eyes of
the guy that was mugging me,
and he had this gun.
And I could tell
he was more afraid
than I was because,
well, first, he
knew he was doing something
just awful and whatever,
but he also--
he's living in a
greater society, where
if a cop comes or I
scream in the wrong way,
his whole life is over.
He'll just be in jail the
rest of his life or something.
And just to see that, the
humanity of the person who's
coming after you or who's
threatening your life,
I can see how it's possible
that they were able to do that,
especially if you're in--
I mean, compared to
us, indigenous people
are in, like, an altered
state of consciousness.
We're in the simulation.
We're so removed from nature.
We are in a CG Disney movie
of the world, you know?
We're walking around like
Spock with our smartphones
like tricorders as if
we're on an alien planet.
That's how separate we are.
And I think that when
you're in and of the world,
when you're enjoying that
sort of home-field advantage
that you get as a
human being on Earth,
I think you start to see
the other humans more
gracefully than we might.
>> Beautiful.
Great observation.
I think where you eventually
end up with a lot of your work
is about this sort
of new digital era
and its impact on humanity.
But what I find
interesting is that you
use each of these important
stages of the growth
of the human species or the
domesticated white human
species, let's say, as analyzing
the values and the intention
behind each of those sort
of inflection points.
And so we just looked at
colonialism in a short way.
One of the other
great periods of time
which impacted us in many
ways was the industrial era.
And we became addicted
to these ideas of time,
of stamping in, stamping out,
of grades, and that infiltrated
so many areas of our life, in
particular schooling, which
I think has had a big
impact on who we've become.
How do you think that industrial
era impacted the schooling
system, for instance, and how
that sort of grow into sort
of impact us as a culture?
>> It's a big subject.
I mean, the hallmark
of industrialism,
really more than the steam
engine or anything else,
is the clock.
And it was it was
Mumford who said--
he wrote this great book
"Technics and Civilization--"
I think what he was
observing-- the power
of the clock in
the industrial age
is that before
people would create value
and exchange it, you know?
I'll make a candle
or make some shoes
and bring it to market and
exchange it with someone else.
When the industrial
age happened,
what it was really about
was disconnecting people
from the value they created.
So instead of me making a pair
of shoes and selling them,
now it's me going to
work at a factory,
nailing one nail into
the bottom of a shoe
and handing it over
to the next guy.
And instead of selling my
value, I'm selling my time.
I'm working by the hour.
They put the clock up on the
clock tower as if to say, look,
it's all fair.
An hour is an hour.
Isn't that just?
But what's intrinsically
unfair is that I'm not
allowed to create value.
I'm only allowed
to sell my time.
And now, 500 years
later, 600 years later,
we see it as, well,
that's employment.
You just get a job.
That's what you do.
You work 40 hours a week.
It's like, no, but
that's sort of know
that "time is money" was born.
Because time was money.
It was all about time.
And then the only
metric that tends
to matter is the efficiency,
how much work can I get out
of someone in that hour?
How much value can I
extract in that hour?
So I want to increase
the efficiency.
And we had what was
called "Taylorism,"
which was a scientific
management school, where you'd
stand next to workers
with a stopwatch
and see, how many nails can they
put in the bottom of that shoe?
And 30 seconds-- well,
get it down to 28.
Get it down to 20.
So once we start looking
at people as mechanisms
through which we
extract value, then it
wasn't too long until
our education system
kind of flipped on its head.
Public education was
originally invented as kind
of a mercy or a compensation.
It was so that the coal
miner could come home
after a day of work and
be able to read a novel
and appreciate it or be
able to read the paper
and then vote effectively
or intelligently.
It was compensation
for a life of hard work
so you could have the dignity
of having a mind that actually
functioned.
But slowly, over time--
and I guess because of time
and the value of efficiency,
we started to externalize job
training to public education.
So now, we've got the
principles of our high schools
and the presidents
of our colleges
meeting with the CEOs of
corporations to find out,
what do you want our
students to learn?
What do you want them to
know so they can get jobs?
How do you want
us to train them?
So corporations are just
externalizing employee training
to the schools.
So what is that?
I mean, there's a model.
It's the Prussian model of
education, where the school is
modeled after the
factory, with bells
ringing after each period, and
the teachers like the foremen,
and the students
follow the directions.
So if anything, you're doing
the opposite of education.
You're not creating inquisitive,
open, creative, disruptive
minds.
You're not going to
favor liberal arts.
In a modern age,
this is where we get
what we keep calling "STEM."
This is science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics.
Beautiful, but why do
we want to teach stem?
So they learn how to program,
so they can go and make
computers for Silicon
Valley and get jobs,
and keep this
ridiculous thing going.
No, we don't want them to learn
liberal arts and humanities
because then what?
Then, they're going to start
to question the whole thing.
Critical thinking makes
you look outside the frame
of corporate capitalism and
say, well, wait a minute.
Where's the meaning in this?
What's the future in this?
What are we externalizing
to nature, to women,
to other people?
Who's being enslaved in
order to get the rare Earth
metals to make that rechargeable
battery for my friggin'
iPhone or my Tesla?
These are not
renewable resources.
These are mined,
rare-Earth metals.
So unless you are able
to do critical thinking,
you're not educated at all.
>> Whoa, that was amazing.
Oh, my goodness.
I find that fascinating.
And I really find your
work so interesting
because I feel that
you might be in danger.
You're like the canary
in the coal mine.
>> I'm not in danger.
Nobody listens, so
it doesn't matter.
>> So you're going
die and, eventually,
they're going to go,
that guy was right!
Remember back then?
That guy?
>> Oh, that would be fine.
The martians will see it.
Alien anthropologists who
return to the wreckage
of human civilization and find
a paper copy of one of my books.
>> Uncover it all.
>> Because they're not going
to be able to analyze the zip
drives.
The cloud is going to be lost.
>> Yeah, it's going
to be gone, right?
All these billions
of photographs that
are being taken, just peew!
Gone.
>> I know they'll come and
say, what are these selfies
everybody's talking about?
What were they?
>> One of the things that I
think you point out which I
find quite interesting is
this idea of cooperation.
I was going to say
"coopertition."
That's another thing.
Cooperation versus competition.
And we've been sold this whole
idea that we evolved because
of competition, and then in
your analysis, and I agree,
that's not really
altogether that true.
And yet, we've based
our whole societies,
and our corporations,
and our schooling systems
and everything on this.
What are the dangers
of this ideology?
>> Well, you know, we justified
our competitive landscape.
We justified this artificially
scarce market system
with a kind of a bastardized
interpretation of Darwin.
So the California libertarians
will say, oh, well,
it's survival of the fittest.
And Darwin, and
Hayek, and Adam Smith,
and everybody, they're
all saying that this is--
the nature of reality is species
compete and one succeeds,
and that's why humans
are on the top;
we won; we're the apex
predator; and yay.
And I read Darwin.
And if you read
Darwin, I mean, there's
a little tiny bit
on competition,
but for the most part, what
Darwin is marveling at,
page after page, is
cooperation and collaboration
between species.
Like, look at how these
two creatures will
do a dance for each other to
see who's the strongest so
that they don't have to fight.
And he understands that's
because the big one to kill
the little one, and
the little one's
going to peck out the
eye of the big one.
So it's not good
for either of them.
It's like, let's just dance
around, see who's stronger,
OK, you won, you get that
little piece of melon.
I'm going to go try to
find something else.
Or now, like, we're
learning about trees.
I was taught-- I remember
in middle school--
I won't name her--
but I remember the
science teacher
who taught me about evolution
and said that the trees are
competing for sunlight
in the forest,
and the big tree will
get up to the sun first,
and the little tree will be
in the shade and will die.
And I just read this book
"Secret Life of Trees,"
and it turns out
it's the opposite--
that the big tree that's
getting the sunlight
shares its nutrients
through the soil--
which is not dirt;
soil's alive--
through a matrix of mycelia,
of mushrooms in the soil,
with the little tree.
And then the little tree
gets all those nutrients.
Then, in the winter, when the
big tree loses its leaves,
the little tree, which
is usually an evergreen,
passes nutrients back
through those same mushrooms,
take a service fee, and give the
nutrients back to the big tree.
So the two trees are
not competing for sun.
They're collaborating.
They have diverse
strategies of survival,
which allows the forest,
as a collective organism,
to support itself.
So if human beings are
the most advanced species
on the evolutionary
trail-- which
I don't know that we
are-- but if we are,
it's just a reflection of the
complexity of collaboration
that we were able to do.
And that's because
we developed speech.
I mean, developing speech--
the same evolutionary feature
that allows us to speak also
is why we would choke.
You know, crossing the
windpipe over the esophagus
and the trachea--
the way it's structured-- but
speech was so valuable to us,
we decided it's worth choking
to death or the risk of choking
to death in order to be able
to speak with each other
and collaborate on those levels.
And I look at each
medium that we
create is an extension of
that collaborative urge--
you know, from writing,
and television, and radio,
and even the internet.
But then, we flip
it on itself, and we
don't use it to collaborate.
We use it to dominate
and to extract.
The internet does not establish
rapport between people.
The internet does the
opposite now intentionally.
It's a de-socializing medium
that restricts our creativity
and represses our actual
humanity, our weirdness,
our soul, our
ingenuity is treated
by the digital realm as noise.
And I think that's the signal.
That's what makes us human.
That's what separates
us from some number.
And the fact that we're
not only losing it
but that we disparage
it as that nasty stuff.
That's human intimacy.
It's like that kids
will prefer dry porn
to wet sex is sort of a
symptom of this disconnection
from reality.
>> Mm.
Mm.
I think when you talk about
social media and this sort
of-- well, you're
starting to edge
into the internet of
things, essentially,
that we've created
as a way to connect.
Let's connect more.
This is amazing.
Let's connect.
And one of the side
effects of that is we've
become hyper-connected.
And we're affected now
micro-interruptions all day--
Slack, or it's a DM on
Instagram, or it's Messenger,
or it's WhatsApp or it's this.
And we're not really
adapted to deal
with that much interruption.
What are some of
the side effects
of being so heavily
influenced by these constant--
this bombardment of
micro-interruptions
in our life?
>> Well, I mean, when you
live in a state of perpetual
emergency interruption, where
everything is a call waiting
kind of coming in at you,
it elevates your cortisol.
It keeps you in a kind of a
fight-or-flight state of mind
all the time.
So you can't rest
your eyes on anything.
I mean, you find no peace.
You find no rapport.
You can't establish connections.
It's like a Skype conversation.
It's interesting, you have
a conversation on Skype,
and the person on the
other end agrees with you.
But because you can't see
their pupils getting larger,
you can't see
their head nodding,
your body doesn't get
the sense of agreement.
Your mirror neurons don't fire.
The oxytocin doesn't
get transmitted.
And you don't blame the
technology for that.
You haven't evolved
to blame Skype.
You blame the other person.
You say that person's
not trustworthy.
And you trust humans
less because they're not
giving you--
they're not triggering this
sort of painstakingly evolved
social mechanisms that
we have, that we've
developed over 600,000
years of evolution
to bond with other people and
do the necessary collaboration
and social group formation.
So we get desocialized.
We can't think deeply.
I mean, Clifford Nass from
Stanford, who's now passed,
but he did all these
experiments with students, even
people who thought that
they were getting more done
while multitasking,
they invariably
were getting less done.
So they thought
they got more done.
They thought they
had better retention.
They thought they had
deeper understanding.
Invariably, when they
were multitasking,
they got less done.
They had less retention.
They had a more
shallow understanding
of what had just happened.
So what does that mean?
It means we're getting dumber,
or we're operating less
intelligently with less
thought, with less grounding,
and we're bringing less
of ourselves to bear.
So what happens, the thing
that I get most upset about,
is we end up with this kind
of profound reversal of figure
and ground, of user and used.
You are not the user
of your smartphone.
Your smartphone is
the user of you.
The apps on the phone are
designed to play the person.
You can go to
Stanford now and study
with BJ Fogg, who
has a lab called
"Captology Lab" at Stanford.
All the computer scientists
go through his lab.
And captology is
figuring out, how
do we use technology
to influence,
to design human behavior?
So we take all of the insights
of behavioral finance,
all of the algorithms from
Las Vegas slot machines,
and all of, now, the
learnings from the Internet
of Things and figure
out, how do we embed them
in apps to get people to
do what we want them to do?
So every time you swipe
on your smartphone,
it's getting smarter
about you, and you
are getting dumber about it.
And even if you want to find out
what the smartphone is doing,
the mechanisms,
they're protected
in black-box
architectures that have
proprietary, legal encryption
because these are trade secrets
that they won't even let us see.
So your phone is--
everything you do,
every agreement
you sign when you say,
yes, I agree, I consent,
is for them to mine everything
they can about every action you
take, every breath, every
swipe so that they can not only
predict what you
are likely to do,
but they can
attempt to force you
to behave true to your
statistical profile.
That's what Facebook is.
They use data from
your past to put you
in a statistical
bucket, and then
put stuff in your
news feed that gets
you to behave true to
your statistical bucket.
So if they know
with 80% accuracy
that you're going to go on
a diet in the next month,
your user feed, your
news feed's going
to start to have articles
in it like, oh, this is what
happens when you're too fat.
Or, look at a
person's blood stream
when it has you know
bad globules in it,
not just because they want you
to buy specific diet products
but because they want to
get that 80% of people
who are going to go on a
diet in your little group,
they want to get that
80 up to 90 or 95.
So they're just trying to
increase the predictability
of human behavior and
hone off the weird edges
of anomalous behavior
of unpredictable stuff.
But if you think about
it, if what we're doing
is taking the most powerful
technologies we have
and using them to try to get
the 20% of people who are going
to do creative weird things
and get that down to 10% or 5%,
and we're doing that
at a moment where
we need tremendous
amounts of innovation
in order to get ourselves
out of this corner
we've painted ourselves
into with climate
change and social
collapse, that's
a really non-winning strategy
for our human futures.
>> So are you in a in a
"boycott social media"
sort of camp then?
Or where do you sit on this?
I mean it's hard.
>> I don't see a use for
social media, you know?
You gotta look back at what
is the internet good for
or what could it be good for?
And what it could be good
for is connecting you
to people who have
something in common with you
that's non-local to you.
So you have some rare
disease, so there's
1,000 people around
the world, they
can connect on this network.
Or you've got some bizarre--
like, I'm interested
in, you know,
John Stewart Mills'
understanding
of the steady state
economy, who else is?
Oh, well, there's
some guy in Norway
and some other guy in
Japan, and we can then--
the places I have fun
online are rather--
I wouldn't say esoteric
but really particular
bulletin boards.
And they're going to
be old-style, HTML,
bulletin-board discussion
groups about weird things, even
if it's crazy antique
cars or whatever you like
or diseases of the pug dog.
Whatever it is
that's your thing,
you're going to
find that, and it's
a healthy set of connections.
But when it's substituting
for all of the real-world
connections that
you have, I mean,
the now stereotypical two girls
walking down the street texting
each other instead of
talking with each other,
that's where it's just--
that's where it's insane.
And you've got to understand,
of course, that Facebook is not
there--
these social media
companies are not there
to enhance your connection
with other people.
They are there to
monetize your social graph
and give value to
their shareholders.
So you could argue, well, I'm
a shareholder because I have
a retirement plan
with Facebook in it,
so I'll sacrifice my
children's mental health
so that my Facebook
stock goes up
so I can make
enough money to pay
for a psychiatrist for my
child who's cutting because she
doesn't have any friends.
It's like, wait a minute.
That's kind of ass backwards.
Yeah, I'm not like saying, don't
go on social media, oh my god.
But understand what it's for
before you use a platform.
Be in touch enough with
your emotional sensibilities
to think, how does
this platform make
me-- do I feel good when I'm
done with a Facebook session?
Do I feel great and
connected with others?
What's my heart rate after that?
What's my cortisol
levels after that?
Has the messaging I've gotten
been that the world is a place
that I want to connect with?
Or is it teaching me that the
world's a weird and scary place
that I shouldn't go to?
So it's pretty basic.
It's why I used to argue
program or be programmed,
which didn't mean become
a programmer necessarily,
but understand what a
platform is programmed
for before you submit to it.
You know when you install
an app on your phone,
you think, how is
that going to affect
the ecosystem of my phone?
Is it going to use
a lot of power?
Is it GPS?
Is it this?
Think at least as much
about your organism
before you bring an
app into your life,
into your routine,
into what you're doing.
Just oh, the kids
are using WhatsApp.
They're using Snapchat.
They're using-- ah,
I gotta throw that on
and make that part of my life.
You don't.
You really don't.
And what are you missing out on?
What really are
you missing out on?
When you look at the opportunity
cost of the real world--
it's weird.
I was just watching the--
watching TV, and I
saw the commercial
for Disney's new "Lion
King" movie came on.
And they're calling it like a
live-action movie because it
looks real, but it's like made--
it's like a CG movie, where--
and you see this perfect--
it looks real, these lions
that look perfectly real
and this giant jungle that
the lions are going around in,
but I know they're not.
And I look really
carefully on my HD set,
and I could see the
lion is perfect.
A real lion-- when
you look at it
a documentary anyway
or at the zoo,
they've got wounds
and stuff, and rough
spots, and like callus on
their knees and things.
These lions are perfect.
And I'm thinking,
wow, here we are--
Disney, which is
part of the same kind
of giant industrial
complex that's
destroying the real jungle
and killing the actual lions
there is creating a
simulacrum, the simulation
of lions in the jungle that
now kids are going to grow up
and, in some ways, to them, that
is preferable to the real one.
And this is what those guys
like Adorno, and Benjamin,
and Baudrillard,
these people that we
all pooh-poohed in the
'80s and '90s saying,
oh, look at them talking
oh, crazy, postmodernism,
but they were right
that we were going
to disconnect from reality
and create a simulation
to go in its place.
And only the generations
that remember reality
will even know that there
was a reality there.
It's funny to
finally be old enough
to say, oh, wow-- and even
the reality that I thought
was real was obviously fake.
I was in a "Brady Bunch"
television reality.
And the one before that
was some Howdy Doody
reality of my parents
and so on and so on.
Until the only ones
that really know
what's going on because
back to indigenous people.
The only ones who
know what's going on
are people who are
connected to reality.
And that shouldn't be
so scary, you know?
I think maybe one of the
cures for climate change
will be for people not to see
the real world as the enemy,
you know?
As the thing to escape from.
That's kind of the
saddest moment in my work
was when I finally got
to meet the billionaires,
and they wanted to know
where to put their bunkers.
That's what they
wanted to know from me,
how to maintain control
of their security force
after their money is worthless.
So here are the
wealthiest people
on the planet, the winners
of the digital economy,
who are spending their time and
energy trying to figure out,
how do I insulate myself
from the reality I've created
by earning money in this way?
They've got such high
levels of anxiety
because they
understand what they've
done but see themselves as
powerless to turn around
and just engage with
us like human beings.
They really, they want to
escape and leave the rest of us
behind because they think
that's the only way for them
to survive.
>> Let's hope things
change before that happens.
>> They're not going to get
off the planet, you know?
SpaceX and whatever Bezos's
one is, they're not going to--
we tried to make a biosphere
in Arizona on Earth,
and that didn't even work.
So no, we're not going
to, anytime soon,
be able to make a biosphere
on Mars that functions.
>> One of the things that
I would like to just touch
on a little bit deeper is-- you
talked about it when you just
mentioned about how this father
wants to keep his Facebook
stock and let his child use
Facebook even though they might
be cutting and harming
themselves, you know,
social media in this,
like, addicted culture that
we've become a part of is
tending for us to hinge
our self-worth on the
internet on social media.
And ultimately, what do
you think the cost of this
is, first of all,
I mean in terms
of us externalizing
our self-worth
on what other people, random
people might think of us
or how many likes we get?
And additionally, if you
could add sort of flavor
to this conversation in terms
of how much more connected
we are than ever before and
yet we're so disconnected
and how that results in
worsening health outcomes even.
>> Well, in some ways, social
media likes are just a new form
of dollars in your bank account.
Until recently,
whatever it may be,
you had to be, when
I was a kid, 30 or 40
years old before you're
actually thinking
about your self-worth in
terms of the size of my salary
or my bank account.
Those were like parent concerns.
I was like, whatever, who cares?
I'm out playing baseball.
Now, 11, 12, 13-year-olds
who have social media
accounts, they have that
number-- how many people liked
this post, how many
friends do I have on there.
So now, there is a data-driven
currency for their self-worth.
This is a story that goes
back to the beginning
of quantification.
When did we start to see to
measure things as quantities?
When did sort of that
scientific world view
that everything has a
number, we can figure out
a metric for every aspect
of nature-- and anything
that we can't figure out
a number for is evil,
or is female, or is scary.
And there's no
number-- well, we'll
figure out the number eventually
and get it on our spreadsheet.
Kids who are raised
with social media likes
are already quantized.
They're already quantifying
their understanding
of themselves.
So the problem with
it is, to me, it's
almost less about the--
that it's specifically
social media
but that their
sense of self worth
is external to them
rather than experiential--
that it's something telling
me how much I'm worth.
And it's not even human.
At least if you're getting
your sense of self worth
through the way other people
are interacting with you,
like, are they
smiling at me or not?
At least there's mimesis.
At least there's something
kind of communal about it.
When it's a number or when
someone else's positivity is
being expressed to
me through a number
rather than through a pat on the
back, or a nod, or some love,
then it's not actually
feeding my organism.
It's feeding some
accountant inside myself.
And that's just banging
on one nerve, one--
that might be
wetiko right there.
That's the disease.
That's kind of the cancer
is this quantified self.
And then we've got all these
other tools, these Fitbits
and all these things to keep
counting and telling you
all that feedback and numbers,
but it's dangerous, I guess,
because we lose the ability
to be fed organically
from other humans.
We lose the ability to recognize
when someone is with us,
is on our side.
We all end up with a kind of an
induced Asperger's of a sort,
where we can't read social cues
and we don't give social cues.
I've been teaching
for five years now.
And each semester on
the first day of class,
in college, I get notes
from the students.
I get more and more
every semester.
It's a note from the
student's doctor saying,
"Please excuse Johnny from
class presentations and class
participation," and it's
because Johnny has some kind
of a social disorder
that doesn't--
and I'm not teasing Johnny here.
I feel bad for Johnny.
But I don't think that this
is all organic, this increase.
I think that this is an
induced social disability.
No, I'm not going to make Johnny
speak in class because he's
got that fear of
doing it, but what
was happening from
kindergarten to 12th grade?
Johnny, they gave him an
iPad, and he could check up
all the things because even
what Johnny learned in school,
it was all assessed by
the acquisition of data
rather than the acquisition
of skills, of engagement,
the activation of inquiry
of the creative path
because you know they
made Johnny predictable.
They made Johnny compliant.
They put Johnny on a graph.
And now, Johnny has
a social disability.
>> It's more common
than ever before.
That's true.
>> And how are we going to
get ourselves out of that?
Just when the world needs--
>> That's a huge
question, right?
I mean, we have to
retool education
if we're going to
do that, right?
Which is, like, focus
on arts connection or--
I mean, I think about-- when
you're talking about this,
as I mentioned
earlier, I live as part
of an indigenous culture
of Melanesian people,
and they communicate so
deeply with their eyes.
Like, you stop and let
someone cross the road,
and they look at you
and they're like--
they know, and they
connect, and they're
so adept at being
able to communicate
with their entire
body and their smile.
And then you meet
people in New York City
and you're like,
whoa, these people
aren't even seeing anybody.
They're just walking
around like this, right?
It's like, wait, I'm here.
Hello!
>> I've been playing a game--
because I live near New York.
I walk around in
New York City a lot,
and I play this game
where I look around
for someone else who's not in
the thing and make eye contact.
And it's like we're part of
this conspiracy of like--
it's like a body snatcher thing.
Like, oh, there's another one.
I remember it back from--
when I started doing
that originally,
it was back in the rave days.
Remember rave?
And you'd go to a rave-- this
is back in San Francisco.
You'd go to a rave,
and the next--
well, you'd get out at
4:00 in the morning--
but you'd go to work, and the
next day you'd walk around,
and you'd see someone
and you don't even
recognize them
specifically from the rave,
but you can tell
they'd been there.
And you have this knowing
smile, oh, you were there.
And that's the way I
kind of walk around now
is when I find someone who's not
in the device it's, like, oh,
yeah, aren't these people crazy?
I love you, too.
See you some other
time, you know?
It's like, maybe we were
together in a past life
or in a future one.
It's like, this is crazy.
And it's funny because I use
the word "conspiracy" a lot
now because it literally--
conspiracy means
"breathe together--" conspire.
So I really love that idea of--
the idea that breathing together
with someone else in this world
is conspiracy.
That's a conspiracy.
Because everyone is so onboard
the status quo digital reality.
>> It's funny when I think
about conspiracy, I think about,
this is people conspiring
against the status quo, right?
You're saying people breathing
together and connecting
are actually conspiring
against the status quo.
It makes sense.
I mean-- but you don't
think of it in that way.
Practically speaking,
you talk a lot
about this idea of
Team Human, right?
And I love it.
I think it's great.
What does Team Human mean?
What does it mean to
be a part of this idea?
And how can people
sort of enact it
in this sort of evolving
digital landscape.
>> Well, I mean Team Human,
it kind of started as a joke
because I was on a panel with a
singularity guy who was arguing
that human beings should
pass the evolutionary torch
to our digital successors,
and we should fade
in the background and accept
our inevitable extinction,
and I was like,
no, humans matter,
we should have a human future.
And he said, oh,
Rushkoff, you're
just saying that
'cause you're a human.
And that's when I said,
fine, I'm on team human.
But the more I said
it, I realized, well,
you know, I kind of believe
that, that being human
is a team sport.
No one can do this alone.
That being human is this is
this collective activity.
And once you
understand it that way,
then you know your
agenda is to become
part of this great
human race, this thing.
I mean, everybody's
on team human.
And it makes it hard
to have human enemies.
There is no enemy.
It puts you in that same
state as the indigenous people
is that, oh, all these
people are on team human.
They're just sick.
They're just confused.
Hey, you're on the team.
So even whoever, the racist
and the hater, they're on--
they don't know it, but
they can be on team human.
They just have to
rekindle their humanness.
So that's all that really
being on team human.
It's funny.
I get emails from people
saying, how do I join?
Where do I sign up?
And I'm like, if you're
part of the human race,
you're on the team.
It's almost a
facetious construct of,
are you on team human?
It's like, if you can't
even be on team human, ugh.
I mean, I get environmentalists
saying, why do you
care about the humans? suck.
Stop we're the ones that
destroy the planet and all.
We are, but we're
part of nature, too.
It's OK to be nice
to other people,
to recognize the
humanity in them.
And I keep telling
people, if you
can't see the humanity
in the racist guy,
even wearing that
Make America Great--
white again hat or
whatever that is,
if you can't see the human
being under that hat,
then how do you
expect him to see
the human being in the
dark-skinned immigrant who's
come into his country?
You can't see others as other.
That's why the other
big slogan of team human
is, "find the others,"
which I got originally
from Timothy Leary when
he was talking about what
to do after you've had
the psychedelic experience
and see that the world
is all connected.
Find the others.
And I'm meaning the same thing.
Find the others
but find the other.
Find the people that you
think are other from you
and find the human in them
and connect with them.
That's the task.
It's not just to find the
cool, weird pot smokers
that you want to hang out.
Find the weirds.
Find the ones who are lost.
>> I feel like when
you talk like this,
you're starting to sound
like a Vedic Brahman priest--
see oneness in
everybody, you know?
Acknowledge the good
in all of humankind.
And I think it's beautiful.
I think it's a
spiritual message.
And people get that
awakening when they also
take psychedelics, right?
Do you think that the
plants are maybe here
to give us this insight?
I think there's a renaissance
happening in plant medicine,
first of all.
Look at cannabis,
look at psychedelics
being decriminalized in certain
areas in Denver recently.
>> Right, and microdosing
of psilocybin mushrooms.
>> Exactly, and Michael
Pollan's bringing to prominence,
I mean Andrew Weil, who I was a
huge fan of in his early days,
he got ostracized by the medical
community when he first started
delving into that, right?
And now, it's all
the rage again,
so he's back on happy territory.
Do you think that plant medicine
is making a renaissance just
at the right time
so that we can all
awake into the oneness
that resides within us?
>> Sure.
I don't think it's
necessary, you know?
I mean, I think any
medicine is fine,
especially if you're
sick, you know?
And I do think that we're
all on drugs all the time,
whether you're on caffeine,
or glucose, or Facebook,
or anything, you know?
So it's interesting
to look in a society
at which plants and foods
have been made illegal
and which ones are promoted.
So are you in a culture
that has caffeine, nicotine,
and alcohol?
Are you in a culture that's
having plant proteins
and mushrooms as
part of your life?
I'm so sure.
I don't like advocating
for psychedelics
because I don't think that
they're for everybody.
They're scary for some people.
And I don't think
anything's necessary,
but they're useful
tool if done properly.
I mean, the thing that
amazed me was, you know,
I had psychedelic experiences,
and they were very positively
transformative for me, and I got
to the point where I thought,
oh my gosh, anybody
takes one of these things
and they'll have
those experiences.
But there's people who take
psychedelics that are still
total assholes, you know?
Or they'll think that they're
god, or subjugate others,
or they'll be part of
some evil Silicon Valley
corporation all year and go
to Burning Man for five days
and do psychedelics,
and go back, and still
make Palantir,
and spy on people,
and do all the worst shit.
So I wonder.
But sure, they're fine, and
I'm sure somebody, particularly
people who are depressed or
addicted to certain things,
if they can have a well-mentored
psychedelic session
and get over their depression,
which happens for thousands
of people or all the stuff
Michael Pollan writes about,
too, then sure.
It should be part of
the tools that we humans
have available to ourselves
to correct course.
But I wouldn't say, oh,
therefore in eighth grade,
everyone should be given
their psilocybin trip.
>> True.
One of the big things we
talk about in "Food Matters,"
in the Gaia community-- and
this is about how we can do,
in essence, self-work to become
more conscious, more connected,
such as meditation or
enhancing our capability
to improve our intuition.
Do you think that some
of these maybe considered
more esoteric practices
have their part
in becoming more human and
becoming more connected
so that we can find the
others, so to speak?
>> Yeah, I mean,
for many people,
it's a kind of a
tourism, you know?
And it's fine.
That's one of Anthony
Bourdain-like--
if you can sit and
eat with people,
eat the weird stuff
that other people eat,
then you're going to connect
with them on this intimate way.
And there's all this indigenous
wisdom that we should retrieve,
but I don't know that we
should fool ourselves.
I almost don't want to want
to bastardized these things
or think that we
understand them.
Like, oh, I'm going to spend
three years with the Maori.
And now, hey, I'm Maori!
It's like, dude, spend
3,000 years with the Maori,
and then maybe come and talk.
So it's more a matter of how
do we enable the contributions
of these other civilizations?
How do we allow them
to manifest, not how
do we manifest what they are?
And I'm thinking that
that last book I wrote
might be my last one.
I'm thinking it's time for
us to shut up, you know?
They're quiet and hear--
they hear the other voices.
But, yeah, I mean, the Maori or
the indigenous peoples of India
know more about crop
rotation and soil maintenance
than Monsanto does.
So, yeah, let's
start incorporating
their methodologies
while we can to--
their understandings of things.
But going to have to
do it by the numbers
for a good long
while because we're
not going to have
it in our bones.
But we can say, oh, OK,
these kinds of plants
work well together, and
we'll nourish the soil
and provide food.
Just do it by rote for
5 or 10 generations
until we understand
what's really
going on here because it's
not like they set out--
they didn't come
about that wisdom
in sort of the scientific
discipline methodology
that we use.
They came to that
wisdom because they
see the space between the
lines that we've drawn.
We understand the ocean as
latitude and longitude lines.
That was really useful for
circumnavigation of the globe,
but we don't
understand the waves.
We can't do pattern recognition.
And that's the reality that
we need to foreground now.
>> Beautiful.
I personally am a cup
sort of half-full guy.
I see that we have
created a seething mess
with this current digital
future that we've rushed into
and dove into, and
it's accelerating
at a dizzying speed.
And my hope is that we can use
these structures of capitalism
and the digital future
to sort of shift
to more potentially
conscious-based businesses,
or more purpose-driven
organizations,
or, as you sometimes jokingly
call, "humane technology,"
right?
As we wrap towards the final
part of this interview here,
this question and maybe
a final jazz on this
is, how do you
think we can solve
some of these problems using
the structures that we have?
Do you think we can
solve these big issues
that we have using
technology, and how
do you think it's possible?
>> I mean, technology can be a
part of our solutions as long
as we don't try to
techno-solutionize everything.
As long as we don't think
that everything in reality
is a data point that
can be somehow processed
through silicon.
It's not.
It can be part of it.
I mean, the sort of solutions
I'm looking at mostly
are kind of economic, looking
at how do we develop more
regenerative economic models?
How do we implement local
currencies and alternative
currencies?
How do we start looking
at resources as commons
rather than as commodities
and understand how
to steward a resource together.
So I think that there are some
simple, good, actionable steps
that we can take towards
relocalizing our economies,
accumulating less, learning
how to respect and take
care of elders so that
people don't feel the need
to create a giant war chest
before they retire so they can
live off it the
rest of their lives
because no one's going
to take care of them.
So there are sort of
simple ways that we
can unwind some of this
anxious scarcity-based hoarding
that we're all doing.
In theory, that's what I'm
talking about these days
is giving people some of these
simple steps on understanding
how to create kind
of bounded economies,
where instead of trying
to earn $10 once,
you try to figure out how
do I earn $1 10 times that's
moving through this community?
And that's not impossible.
And those have huge
system-wide effects.
>> So you believe the future
or the way to solve problems is
local then, essentially?
And we've gone
upwards in our scale
from local, to province,
to nation state.
And you're saying we need to
almost deconstruct the nation
state, like this idea that the
astronauts when they went up,
they were like--
what was it called, that theory
that Scherbakov talked about?
When they went up, they were
like, oh, actually, there's
no such thing as
nation states, right?
That's just a facade.
It's a fake idea.
So you think deconstructing
these national lines
and these boundaries
is a way to solve this?
>> It's what's happening now.
That's why they're building
walls on border lines.
It's because the
boundaries have dissolved.
I mean, we all know this
because we studied history.
There were city-states,
and the city-states
gave way to nation states,
which are abstractions.
It's like, no, you're
not a Venetian anymore.
Now, you're an Italian.
It's like, what's that?
Don't worry.
It's what you are.
And these are the
lines around it.
So it was these
abstractions that were
created in order to really--
well, to empower
nobles over people
and to create larger-scale
colonial economies.
So I don't think
it's a matter of--
if you try to dissolve
nation-state boundaries,
people are going
to come after you.
They're going to get scared.
So instead, what
I'm asking people
to do is kind of just
reify your local reality.
Have 80% of what you do and care
about come from where you are.
And then kind of the primacy of
the nation state will go down.
You know, yes, you can still
have international trade.
You can still get your iPhone.
You can still do all
that if you really want.
But let that be kind
of 20% of the economy
rather than 90% of it.
And if we don't do that
consciously, it's going
to do it for us, you know?
Between climate change, economic
collapse, and trade wars,
and God knows what,
you're not going
to be getting those
things anyway,
so start to learn how
to live at human scale.
Because it's not a
terrible limitation.
This is your body.
This is your scale.
So if you live at that
scale, you end up,
I think, so much happier.
I mean, yeah, so we're going
to have to look at that
and say, well what are
people entitled to?
All right, everyone in the world
is entitled to two big plane
trips.
So you get one trip after
high school before college.
You go, where do you want to go?
Everyone signs up.
And then, you get one more
maybe when you retire.
You get to take another trip.
But no, we're not going
to get-- everyone's not
going to get to fly around the
world and do all this stuff.
It's just not
happening, certainly
electric planes are not coming
anytime soon to allow that.
But we got to look
at it not as denial
of your global-scale citizenship
but as an enhancement
of your local reality.
What are you going to get?
You're going to get
friends, and football games,
and sex, and beautiful people,
and sweet fruit, and all
this other stuff that you're
going to like more than Netflix
even.
>> I love it.
Douglas, thank you so
much for your time--
>> Oh, thank you.
>> --for being a
luminary on this topic.
And I hope that this can
permeate and resonate
with people and
they might become--
I think, in practicality,
more local, more connected,
and that that might help change
the direction of humanity.
Thanks for your time.
>> I hope so, too.
[MUSIC PLAYING]